---
layout: posts
title: Five Axioms for Productivity
date: '2020-01-21'
author: Karl Taht
categories: [reality, phd]
custom_excerpt: "If you're anything like me, you often find yourself reading or learning about
new techniques to improve yourself and your life."
---

If you're anything like me, you often find yourself reading or learning about
new techniques to improve yourself and your life. I think when you come across
these ideas they seem new and fresh and at face value always make a lot of sense.
The problem is that if you follow something like the self-improvement section on
Medium, you'll be getting doses of new and fresh ideas everyday. One one hand,
this is really good. Things that are new keep us energized and excited to work
on ourselves. On the other hand, it really muddies the field in terms of what is 
important and what's not. What really works versus what's just interesting to 
consider. However, there's one article that summarized some "Rules to Live By"
if you will, that I think are very powerful. I'm going to present them with my
own spin, and try to order it as well.


## 1. Do the most important thing FIRST. 

Each day, you choose the __order__ of when to do the things you need to do. Whether that's taking
a shower and then having coffee, or grinding out an intensive task before checking
your email.  For me as a PhD student no longer taking classes, I have a ton of freedom in this. 
If I want to wake up at 1pm, spend the afternoon surfing YouTube, and start work
at 6pm, I theoretically have nothing stopping me on most days. However, I think
just reading that it's pretty obvious that would be a terrible idea, but--why?

Well, I personally don't think there's a concrete answer. But, I do feel strongly 
that once you reward yourself with something, you feel accomplished. You're less
incentivized to continue to work. Whether than be going straight to a reward
(e.g. waking up and watching Netflix) or, doing a small task and feeling like
you've made progress on your day (e.g. sending that email when you really need
to code up a new algorithm). 

__The reality is, your day is defined by the most important thing you accomplish.__

## 2. Don't multi-task

People think that multi-tasking somehow improves our efficiency. It doesn't. Have
you ever tried to scroll through Facebook while on the phone? You either missed
the conversation or you didn't really read that post. People can't think about
two things simulatenously. This is why I love the Pomodoro technique and wrote
and article dedicated to it. The whole point is you pick __precisely__ what you're
going to focus on and do just that, no distractions. 

## 3. Own your time

I feel like a lot of people have this mentality that hours in = progress out. In
reality, hours in __times__ intensity __times__ meaningfulness = progress out. When
we grind for too long, we lose focus both on what we're doing and how we're doing it.
This means you can't just commit hours to something, you have to own those hours.

There's three main points for point number 3:

### Spending at least 50% of your time doing

If you objectively look at your time, you probably spend a lot of time doing, well,
not productive things. Or at least, not directly productive things. Meetings, emails,
conversations, they are all necessary for progress and well being. But to truly
make an impact, you have to create. You have to do. Analyze your time and DO.

### Give yourself time.

As much as productive time matters, so does recharge time. During the day, this
means taking a lunch break to take a step back from work. Make sure your focused
and energized and ready for the afternoon. This also means scheduling -- and I 
really mean scheduling -- time to do stuff you just LIKE. Stuff that doesn't
add toward self-improvement, but just self-happiness. It could be Netflix and Chill,
videos games, taking a drive. Whatever it is, make time for you to be happy. If
you're not enjoying this thing called life, there's really no point anyway.


### Track your time. 

Want to really know much you're working? How much Netflix you watch? Get a time
tracking app. There's a lot of them out there, but I personally use "aTimeLogger"
which is super simple. You simple open the app and tap it when you start doing 
stuff. Be wary not to add too many categories or try to account for every minute
of the day. Instead figure out precise things that will help you answer questions
as to how you can better allocate your time. Maybe 20 hours of Netflix should be 
15 hours of Netflix and 5 hours of reading. Maybe the reason your so drained is
because you're spending 60 hours at work and another 10 commuting. And don't think
you have to dedicate a lot of retrospection to it either. Most days I just use it
to see, hey, have I really put in enough hours today? If not, how's the week looking?

Lastly, proceed with caution here. It's easy to get sucked into a vortex of trying
to one-up yourself on how much time your spending on the things you "should be
spending time on". While hours in are likely to improve your success, they're
no guarantee of results. That's why owning your time is 3, and doing what matters
most is first. 

## 4. Write it down -- on Paper.

While I love typing and am a bit of a keyboard fanatic, I think there will always
be something borderline cerebral about physically writing with pen (or pencil) and
paper. Physically writing a check mark when you finish a pomodoro session or crossing
out an item on your to-do list. Besides that, the reality is we have shitty memories.

Physically writing things down helps us remember. It puts things in perspective. 
When you write down a to-do list of what you're going to do today and its 20 items
long, you physically realize it's too much. Now 20 is arbitrary, but if you'll
start doing this everyday you'll realize what you can realistically accomplish in
one day. 

As of late, I like the bullet journal technique. I use it because it's great way
to track short, medium, and long term goals. More than that, it's flexible. You
can add sections that are relevant to you. Mine personally has a "Papers Read" 
section as well as "Things I love about my PhD" section. You can also track goals
easily and more. I highly recommending looking into it as it really took my 
existing journaling technique to the next level, and I'm really happy with it. 

## 5. Discipline

Finally, the last piece of the puzzle is grit. You have to really want to 
improve yourself, and want it as often and as hard as possible. Believe in yourself,
and invest in yourself.