---
layout: posts
title: Paper Rejection Reflection
date: '2020-01-14'
author: Karl Taht
categories: [reality, phd]
custom_excerpt: "One thing I've found about research in general, there are really two high-level
avenues to research."
---

Today, I found out my submission to the ISPASS conference was rejected. The
strange thing about it is, I mostly just feel confused. How should you really 
feel when a your work is rejected? Discredited? Angry? Confused? For me, I just
feel blank. 

You see, at the University of Utah in the Computer Science department, PhD 
candidates are expected to output at least 3 top-tier publications before defending
and graduating. In reality, that translates to something like 5-10 submissions
of varying caliber throughout the program. While I think I've submitted something
like 5 works, this submission was my 2nd __major__ work, in that, I really 
wanted/needed it to get accepted. 

The odd thing is, the rejection felt expected. Objectively, I defend the paper. 
I think it should have gotten in. It had novelty. It had results. It was cohesive. 
But in the end the results weren't good __enough__ for the reviewers it seems. 

One thing I've found about research in general, there are really two high-level
avenues to research. There's work that focuses on improving industry scale solutions,
research that optimizes the current reality. In general, these types of works will net 
incremental improvement. Intuitively, 
if it's a problem that really matters many people will be focused on solving that
problem, so the existing solution is probably pretty good. Nevertheless, the
incremental 1\% improvement results in positive impact on 99\% of users. 

The alternative type of research, is the niche but truly novel. This is the type
of work where  a solution improves the current state-of-the-art by many times 
over. The novelty and improvement shows promise in a field either forgotton or
never before seen. With this type of work, there's two possible implications. 
People realize that this novel area is worth further investigation, and it opens
up a new domain of research, or, it fades into nothing. 

On the rare occassion, a work will vastly improve the state-of-the-art AND be
impactful at a large scale. These are the "big name works" if you will,
the ones that made people famous and impacted the world. These 
types of works which hit on both levels require a real tenacity for the field, 
in addition to brilliance. 

I think the reason why I feel rather detached from the whole situation is that
when I look at my work as well as the work of most of my colleagues, I feel we
slot nicely into either the "real" or "novel". For example, my interest in Spark
compute engine improvements are very real -- changes could quickly make it to 
industry and effect thousands of servers. On the other hand, my colleagues' work
is novel. They are designing completely new computer architectures to optmize
neural networks. However, the likeliihood that their chip will be fabricated is 
low, and it's even less likely that the chip design will be widely adopted into
industry.

Now, my point isn't to argue which is better or more interesting -- I think that's
clearly in the eyes of the beholder -- but fundamentally, I think we can become
disconnected from importance of our work as researchers. Does what we do really
matter if it's just 1% improvement or a niche design? Clearly, the answer is yes.
Those 1% improvements stack up from all over the world, and those niche designs
continue to improve until they can no longer be ignored. But simple knowledge
doesn't override emotional response. 

And I think that's the real crux: the paper rejection pushes me to believe my
incremental improvement is just that. It distances me from believing my work
matters and leaves me feeling blank. While I don't like ending on such a negative
note, I think I must. Social media promotes only sharing the best aspects of life,
but a big part of reality that is ignored is the lows. This is a low, and that's okay.